# dPAN's: Reimagining Collective Action in the 21st Century

_by Nate Suits_

When disaster strikes, when systems fail, or when communities feel abandoned, it's the collective efforts of individuals that weave the fabric of resilience. It doesn't require grand gestures or sweeping policies; it begins with the simple, profound truth that when we unite, we can achieve more than we ever could alone. Whether it's rebuilding after a storm, reviving a forgotten corner of a neighborhood, or addressing the struggles of daily life, collective action is the thread that binds us, making us stronger and more connected.

If we want to build better communities, collective action must become more than just an occasional response to crises; it must become an unconscious behavior within society. The ability of individuals and organizations to work together toward shared goals is essential for addressing our complex social, economic, and environmental issues. However, coordinating such efforts requires overcoming significant obstacles, including limited resources, varying priorities among stakeholders, and the complexities of effective communication. These challenges are further compounded by the need to build and sustain trust, ensure equitable participation, and adapt to the rapidly changing demands of our modern societies. Collective action is the outcome of solving complex coordination problems in our immediate environments by uniting communities around shared goals and aligning their efforts through collaboration and mutual accountability.

Currently, we rely on our institutions of government to facilitate this collective action on our behalf through bureaucratic forms of public administration. In our daily lives we rely on our local governments to solve a myriad of problems ranging from the provision of essential social services to maintaining our fragile and degrading infrastructures.

A significant barrier to the continued efficiency of our centralized public-sector is the limited capacity that local governments have to monitor and execute the policies adopted by the citizens of their respective jurisdictions. Additionally, the financial and human capital within these centralized structures are not well equipped for the adaptation of the ever-growing needs of the local population. As we continue to see the stress that our local governments are under, we must come to the realization that our modern-day administrative methods for collective action are not and will never be sufficient.

Our reliance on government institutions has allowed us as individuals to be as free and creative as we can be, knowing that we do not have to worry about providing these things for one another. However, this reliance cannot be maintained without public trust; trust that our tax dollars are spent wisely, and trust that those with the power to make decisions on how our tax dollars are spent do so ethically and with precision.

While we have a lot of bureaucratic mechanisms in place to preserve that trust, we often see the degradation of these accountability structures in many of the institutions and agencies within our local governments. Public trust is the metric of survival for all governments, and when that public trust erodes we see how fragile our society becomes. As we strive to expand our government's capabilities to ensure this trust is never broken, all it takes is one bad actor to destroy everything we've worked so hard to build.

The growing distrust in centralized institutions combined with the increasingly complex demands for their work requires a swift reimagination for how we facilitate collective action in the 21st century. In order to do this, we need to do more than criticize and attempt to destroy our current methods of public administration…we need to provide alternatives.

## Decentralized Public Administration Networks (dPAN's)

The use of distributed ledger technologies is a fundamental advancement within the category of coordination. While the majority of blockchain innovation has been centered around the financial mechanisation of everything, its applications within the area of human coordination have been extremely limited. While there are many reasons for this, ranging from a lack of funding to issues of liability, the largest obstacle has been establishing a vision and framework for how blockchains can be utilized for the purpose of facilitating local collective action.

Fundamentally, blockchains provide us with permanent pieces of digital public infrastructure that can be relied upon even after it stops providing us with meaningful utility. Blockchains inherently minimize the need for trust, and create robust incentives that can be fine-tuned to influence the formation and conditioning of new types of communal behaviors. Additionally, they offer an environment for repeated games to be played where acts of civic engagement through repetitive functions can lead to norms of reciprocity that improve the efficiency of society and facilitate coordination without the fear of corruption or exploitation.

A decentralized Public Administration Network (dPAN) is a local blockchain network that is designed to incentivize the coordination of local citizens and organizations around a specific set of collective functions. The purpose for creating these networks is to shift public trust away from government agencies and place it into equilibrium with the citizens it represents by giving local communities the tools by which they can become self-reliant. The thesis being that by atomizing the mechanisms of public administration, coordination networks can unlock a more inclusive, democratic, and cost-effective path for community lead governance, enabling a more direct and responsive means for facilitating collective action that serves as a more viable and sustainable alternative to traditional